Add COMMITTERS.adoc (#10915)
quarkusio/quarkus: COMMITTERS.adoc

you need at least one review by your peers.

Thus the need for a pull request.

So you are more like a merger than a committer
and you might merge more PRs from others than your own work.

While not absolute, here are some advices:

* if you really want a review by a specific person,
  make it a named reviewer via a GitHub UI
* if someone asked for a specific reviewer, better
  give some time for this person to review the PR.
  If not reviewed in a reasonable amount of time,
  better ping him again to have some information
  or ask the original author if we should go ahead.
* if in doubt (on a specific part or because you're
  not comfortable reviewing documentation or any other reason),
  ask for help
* except if it's a totally non brainer (typically a typo fix),
  let the PR bake a few hours so some other people can have a
  look if interested.
  If the PR is very large or is a new extension, better let it
  bake for a few days.
* we do merge commits so please ask the author to properly
  squash the commits before merging.
  The idea is to have proper semantic commits.
  If the author is not familiar with Git or not available,

>   you can also (carefully) do it for him as soon as you agreed on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  you can also (carefully) do it for them as soon as you agreed on it.
```

Author: Ah good catch, I'm usually very careful about that but missed that one! Thanks!

Author: I fixed another occurrence too.

* make sure the commit comments are meaningful
* at the beginning, you can start by giving your approval and not merging
  and see how things evolve.
  This should give you some hints of important things to check in the future.
* only merge pull requests that target master.

>   Dealing with old branches is a separate process.

Reviewer: This should be in bold

* if you are sure a PR should go in and is just waiting for CI,
  just use the `triage/waiting-for-ci` label.
  It is a good hint for other committers.

Obviously, each situation is different so use your own judgement,
and if in doubt, just ask for advice, the other committers are here to help.

== Pull Request Title

The title should be in English, should not contain an issue number.
It should also not contain ellipsis.

If your commit message was too long and GitHub automatically cut
the title, that's helpful if you can take the time to move the cut
part where it belongs to have a full title.

Titles are included in the Release notes so they are important.

> A good title would look like: `Fix this complex issue`.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest something like:  "Fix <issue short description>" e.g "Fix random failing tests in Quartz Extension" as "Fix complex issue" is not a good title (I know it is taken here as an example)

Author: Good idea, done!

> A good title would look like: `Fix this complex issue`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good title would look like: `Introduce Hibernate Reactive extension`.
```

Reviewer: Heh @machi1990 was faster than me. Thank you! :wink:

Author: I added your example too.

Reviewer 2: Thank you!

A bad title would look like: `fix(#444)`.

== Issues Fixed

When a PR fixes some issues, it's good practice to add it in the description.

One issue per line with something like:

[source,asciidoc]
----
* Fix #444
* Fix #555
----

Note that GitHub won't detect issues properly if you do something like

> `Fix #444 #555`.

Reviewer: Better put in a [NOTE] block

Author: Done but notes are ugly on GitHub :).

== Affecting Labels and Milestones

Affecting labels and milestones is very important in our process.

Before each release, we check that we don't have any orphan i.e.
closed issues that don't have either a milestone affected or
some of the "excluding" labels.

Thus:

> * when your merge a pull request, please affect it with the current milestone marked with "master".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* when you merge a pull request, please affect it with the current milestone marked with "master".
```

* if the pull request has issues associated (i.e. if the pull request fixes some issues),

>   also affect the milestone to the issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  you should also affect the milestone assigned to the issues.
```

> * if you close a pull request because we won't merge it, please add the appropriate `triage/` label:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* if you close a pull request because the committers have decided to not merge it, please add the appropriate `triage/` label:
```

  `triage/invalid`, `triage/out-of-date`, `triage/wontfix` are usually in order.
* if you close an issue because it has been fixed, either add the milestone
  if you can find it easily or use the `triage/out-of-date` if you can't.
* if you close an issue for any other reason, one of the aforementioned `triage/` labels
  is probably adequate.

== Backporting Process

When we release a new version of Quarkus, we usually do a bugfix
release a couple of weeks after.

Everytime, we do a release, we create a release branch to host
the commits for these bugfix releases.

All the pull requests are merged in master so for the new feature 
release of Quarkus.
They won't be integrated in the previous version branch.

> One of your pull request might qualify for being backported to this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of your pull requests might qualify for being backported to this
```

bugfix branch.

Good examples of that might be:

> * bugfixes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* bug fixes
```

Author: not sure about that one, I think it's commonly accepted.

* documentation fixes
* usability fixes

Obviously, the barrier is higher for large pull requests as
they might be more risky to backport.
But sometimes, we just have to backport them anyway.

If you think your pull request or the pull request you review might be a good backport candidate,
please add the `triage/backport?` label.

The question mark is important:
it is not automatic and we carefully review each pull request before backporting.

Thus, if not entirely clear, don't hesitate to add a comment to the pull request
when adding the label.

And don't be surprised if we come to you with some questions about it
when we prepare the next bugfix release.

== Good First Issues

We need to find the right balance between fixing the issue right away
or try to get a new contributor onboard.

It's not always easy to find it but if you think the issue is appropriate,
affecting it the `good first issue` label for some time might be a good thing.

Obviously, critical bugs are not good candidates :).

== I Did Something Wrong, What Should I Do?

Take a deep breath and don't worry, it happens.

> Just ping @gsmet and @geoand and we will find a solution.

Reviewer: Maybe suggest asking in Zulip?

Author: yeah I wasn't sure what was the best way. But sure I can suggest that.

= Information for Quarkus Committers

This document contains useful information for Quarkus committers.

[NOTE]
====
It is a work in progress, so if you think information is missing/unclear/inadequate,
please reach out to us on the `quarkus-dev` mailing-list.
====

This document has a lot of information.
It is not a set of strict rules, it is here to guide you.
If you forget to do something, miss something, don't worry, it happens.

Do your best and that will already be a lot :).

== Merging Pull Requests

The first thing is that, while being a committer,
you can't really commit directly to the main repository:
you need at least one review by your peers.

Thus the need for a pull request.

So you are more like a merger than a committer
and you might merge more PRs from others than your own work.

> While not absolute, here are some advices:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While not absolute, here is some advice:
```

> * if you really want a review by a specific person,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If you really want a review by a specific person,
```

  make it a named reviewer via a GitHub UI

> * if someone asked for a specific reviewer, better

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If someone asked for a specific reviewer, better
```

  give some time for this person to review the PR.
  If not reviewed in a reasonable amount of time,
  better ping them again to have some information
  or ask the original author if we should go ahead.

> * if in doubt (on a specific part or because you're

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If in doubt (on a specific part or because you're
```

  not comfortable reviewing documentation or any other reason),
  ask for help

> * except if it's a totally non brainer (typically a typo fix),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* except if it's a total no-brainer (typically a typo fix),
```

> * except if it's a totally non brainer (typically a typo fix),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Except if it's a totally no-brainer (typically a typo fix),
```

  let the PR bake a few hours so some other people can have a
  look if interested.
  If the PR is very large or is a new extension, better let it
  bake for a few days.

> * we do merge commits so please ask the author to properly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* We do merge commits so please ask the author to properly
```

  squash the commits before merging.
  The idea is to have proper semantic commits.
  If the author is not familiar with Git or not available,

>   you can also (carefully) do it for them as soon as you agreed on it.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps add this link: https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/committing-changes-to-a-pull-request-branch-created-from-a-fork as a lot of people don't know this is even possible

Author: Done.

> * make sure the commit comments are meaningful

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Make sure the commit comments are meaningful.
```

> * at the beginning, you can start by giving your approval and not merging

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* As a new committer, you can start by giving your approval and not merging
```

  and see how things evolve.
  This should give you some hints of important things to check in the future.

> * only merge pull requests that target master.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Only merge pull requests that target master.
```

  **Dealing with old branches is a separate process.**

> * if you are sure a PR should go in and is just waiting for CI,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If you are sure a PR should go in and is just waiting for CI,
```

  just use the `triage/waiting-for-ci` label.
  It is a good hint for other committers.

> * if you think a pull request is an essential part of a given milestone

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If you think a pull request is an essential part of a given milestone
```

  (and can realistically be part of it),
  you should affect this milestone to it so that we can be sure it stays on the radar.

Obviously, each situation is different so use your own judgement,
and if in doubt, just ask for advice, the other committers are here to help.

== Pull Request Title

The title should be in English, should not contain an issue number.

> It should also not contain ellipsis.

Reviewer 3: +100

If your commit message was too long and GitHub automatically cut
the title, that's helpful if you can take the time to move the cut
part where it belongs to have a full title.

Titles are included in the Release notes so they are important.

A good title would look like: `Fix XXX in Quartz extension` or
`Introduce Hibernate Reactive extension`.

A bad title would look like: `fix(#444)`.

== Issues Fixed

When a PR fixes some issues, it's good practice to add it in the description.

One issue per line with something like:

[source,asciidoc]
----
* Fix #444

> * Fix #555

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Resolves #555
```

Author: Yeah, there are a couple of different options but I'm not sure it's worth making the message more complex here.

Author: I added a TIP below.

Reviewer 5: should it have description of what it fixes? not just the number?

Reviewer 6: it would hopefully just be redundant. the "Fix #nnn" is mainly just to autoclose issues thus doesnt require more info by default

Author: If you pass your mouse on the issue, you have the issue info so it's perfectly OK as is.

----

[NOTE]
====
GitHub won't detect issues properly if you do something like
`Fix #444 #555`.
====

== Affecting Labels and Milestones

Affecting labels and milestones is very important in our process.

Before each release, we check that we don't have any orphan i.e.
closed issues that don't have either a milestone affected or
some of the "excluding" labels.

Thus:

> * when you merge a pull request, please affect it with the current milestone marked with "master".

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* When you merge a pull request, please affect it with the current milestone marked with "master".
```

> * if the pull request has issues associated (i.e. if the pull request fixes some issues),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If the pull request has issues associated (i.e. if the pull request fixes some issues),
```

  you should also affect the milestone assigned to the issues.

> * if you close a pull request because the committers have decided to not merge it,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If you close a pull request because the committers have decided to not merge it,
```

  please add the appropriate `triage/` label: `triage/invalid`, `triage/out-of-date`,
  `triage/wontfix` are usually in order.

> * if you close an issue because it has been fixed, either add the milestone

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If you close an issue because it has been fixed, either add the milestone
```

  if you can find it easily or use the `triage/out-of-date` if you can't.

> * if you close an issue for any other reason, one of the aforementioned `triage/` labels

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If you close an issue for any other reason, one of the aforementioned `triage/` labels
```

  is probably adequate.

== Backporting Process

When we release a new version of Quarkus, we usually do a bugfix
release a couple of weeks after.

> Everytime, we do a release, we create a release branch to host

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Everytime we do a release, we create a release branch to host
```

the commits for these bugfix releases.

> All the pull requests are merged in master so for the new feature 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All the pull requests are merged in master so they are applied to the new feature 
```

release of Quarkus.
They won't be integrated in the previous version branch.

> One of your pull requests might qualify for being backported to this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some pull requests however may qualify for being backported to this
```

bugfix branch.

Good examples of that might be:

* bugfixes
* documentation fixes
* usability fixes

Obviously, the barrier is higher for large pull requests as
they might be more risky to backport.
But sometimes, we just have to backport them anyway.

> If you think your pull request or the pull request you review might be a good backport candidate,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you think your pull request or the pull request you are reviewing, might be a good backport candidate,
```

please add the `triage/backport?` label.

The question mark is important:

> it is not automatic and we carefully review each pull request before backporting.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps also add a comment mentioning that it's possible to backport specific commits from a pull request if that pull request contains both fixes and new features

Author: Yeah I don't want to make that too prominent because it makes it a bit awkward for assigning milestones to the PR.

Reviewer 3: OK :)

Thus, if not entirely clear, don't hesitate to add a comment to the pull request
when adding the label.

And don't be surprised if we come to you with some questions about it
when we prepare the next bugfix release.

== Good First Issues

We need to find the right balance between fixing the issue right away

> or try to get a new contributor onboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and trying to onboard new contributors.
```

> It's not always easy to find it but if you think the issue is appropriate,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's not always easy to find one, but if you think the issue is appropriate,
```

affecting it the `good first issue` label for some time might be a good thing.

Obviously, critical bugs are not good candidates :).

== I Did Something Wrong, What Should I Do?

Take a deep breath and don't worry, it happens.

Just ping https://github.com/gsmet/[Guillaume Smet (@gsmet)] and https://github.com/geoand/[Georgios Andrianakis (@geoand)]

> either in the pull request or on https://quarkusio.zulipchat.com/[our Zulip] and we will find a solution.

Reviewer 3: :+1:

Reviewer 6: how about we create a `@committerhelp` (?) group alias to use here instead of specific individuals ? like we done for devtools, and others.

Author: We could have an alias. TBH, my fear was that people could get worried of looking dumb or something like that. Thus limiting the number of persons would help. You know your mistake won't be seen by 20 persons.

But I can live with an alias if others think I'm overthinking it.

Reviewer: +1 on a group

Reviewer 3: I don't mind either way. It's going to be a very limited group one way or another

Reviewer 6: @quarkusio/committerhelp now exist both on github and zulip; members being gsmet and geoand at this time.

= Information for Quarkus Committers

This document contains useful information for Quarkus committers.

[NOTE]
====
It is a work in progress, so if you think information is missing/unclear/inadequate,
please reach out to us on the `quarkus-dev` mailing-list.
====

This document has a lot of information.
It is not a set of strict rules, it is here to guide you.
If you forget to do something, miss something, don't worry, it happens.

Do your best and that will already be a lot :).

> == Merging Pull Requests

Reviewer 5: One subject I did not see covered is dependency updates. I suppose there is a dedicated process specialization. And maybe a warning that key dependencies like Netty or vert.x should be updated early in the cycle.

Author: Yes, I will add something about it.

The first thing is that, while being a committer,
you can't really commit directly to the main repository:
you need at least one review by your peers.

Thus the need for a pull request.

So you are more like a merger than a committer
and you might merge more PRs from others than your own work.

While not absolute, here is some advice:

* If you really want a review by a specific person,

>   make it a named reviewer via a GitHub UI

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  make it a named reviewer via GitHub's "Reviewers" UI
```

  as long as you agreed on it.
* Make sure the commit comments are meaningful.
* As a new committer, you can start by giving your approval and not merging
  and see how things evolve.
  This should give you some hints of important things to check in the future.
* Only merge pull requests that target master.
  **Dealing with old branches is a separate process.**
* If you are sure a PR should go in and is just waiting for CI,
  just use the `triage/waiting-for-ci` label.
  It is a good hint for other committers.
* If you think a pull request is an essential part of a given milestone
  (and can realistically be part of it),
  you should affect this milestone to it so that we can be sure it stays on the radar.

Obviously, each situation is different so use your own judgement,
and if in doubt, just ask for advice, the other committers are here to help.

== Pull Request Title

The title should be in English, should not contain an issue number.
It should also not contain ellipsis.

If your commit message was too long and GitHub automatically cut

> the title, that's helpful if you can take the time to move the cut

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
the title, it is helpful if you can take the time to move the cut
```

part where it belongs to have a full title.

Titles are included in the Release notes so they are important.

> A good title would look like: `Fix XXX in Quartz extension` or

Reviewer 5: Proposal.
If XXX is an issue number I don't think it is meaningful in a changelog.
`Fix #454 Off by one error in days in Quartz` feels better?

Reviewer: I just realized that the description above says that the title should not contain the issue number but here we're saying that a good title would have it?

Reviewer: Or I think the XXX means the fix in question: `Fix off by one error in days in Quartz`

Reviewer: Better substitute the XXX with something meaningful to avoid any doubts :)

Author: Yes, done.

`Introduce Hibernate Reactive extension`.

A bad title would look like: `fix(#444)`.

== Issues Fixed

When a PR fixes some issues, it's good practice to add it in the description.

One issue per line with something like:

[source,asciidoc]
----
* Fix #444
* Fix #555
----

[TIP]
====
GitHub supports a variety of keywords here: `fix`, `fixes`, `fixed`,
`resolve`, `resolves`, `resolved`, `close`, `closes`, `closed`
all do the same thing.
====

[WARNING]
====
GitHub won't detect issues properly if you do something like

> `Fix #444 #555`.

Reviewer 6: how often does this occur (I know I did this in past as i didn't know better) ? we could add "fail" check for it

Author: Not that often. I don't think it's worth doing something about it.

Reviewer 6: ack.

====

== Affecting Labels and Milestones

Affecting labels and milestones is very important in our process.

> Before each release, we check that we don't have any orphan i.e.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Before each release, we check that we don't have any stray issues i.e.
```

nitpick, but orphan can be quite a loaded word - thus suggesting 'stray' as more telling.

Author: Well I can go with `orphan issue`. But I don't know what `stray` means and I'm pretty sure I won't be the only one.

Author: Open to other suggestions. `stray` is definitely in the good direction but I'm afraid I'm not the only one not knowing what it means.

Maybe just `lost`?

Reviewer: Maybe go directly with the intent and avoid such terms (eg. Before each release, we check that we don't have any closed issues that don't have a milestone affected ...)

Author: Ah yes, good idea.

Author: Done.

> closed issues that don't have either a milestone affected or

Reviewer 6: this part we can definitely automate us out of - just have a check on close that labels and milestones are applied properly.

some of the "excluding" labels.

Thus:

> * When you merge a pull request, please affect it with the current milestone marked with "master".

Reviewer 6: should actually be able to automate this...on pr close we can check which branch it was merged into and check and assign automatiically.

Author: See other document. Let's not pollute this one with a discussion we have elsewhere.

This document needs to be up to date with what we're doing.

> * If the pull request has issues associated (i.e. if the pull request fixes some issues),

Reviewer 6: also automatable!

Author: Please don't make this document one more time about this.

This is the current version. Once things are automated, it will be updated. For now, it's not.

  you should also affect the milestone assigned to the issues.
* If you close a pull request because the committers have decided to not merge it,
  please add the appropriate `triage/` label: `triage/invalid`, `triage/out-of-date`,
  `triage/wontfix` are usually in order.
* If you close an issue because it has been fixed, either add the milestone
  if you can find it easily or use the `triage/out-of-date` if you can't.
* If you close an issue for any other reason, one of the aforementioned `triage/` labels
  is probably adequate.

== Backporting Process

When we release a new version of Quarkus, we usually do a bugfix
release a couple of weeks after.

> Everytime we do a release, we create a release branch to host

Reviewer 6: we should mention the naming pattern used.

Author: Well, it's the version. What's the point in adding that info here? (The document is already very long)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Everytime we do release (i.e. 1.6.0), we create a branch (i.e. 1.6) to host
```

I don't think that piece of clarity and ~10 characters hurts ;) up to you.

Reviewer: @maxandersen There is an extra `do` in your suggestion (eg. Everytime we release...) :smiley:

Author: It's not the extra characters, it's just that I don't think it brings anything to the plate and just adds noise. Did it anyway in the last version.
